GWEN IFILL: One sign that
presidential primaries
are near, candidates are
starting to ramp
up their TV ad spending.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins takes a
look at the mountain of cash
being spent on
ads, and whether it's worth it.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm Marco Rubio.
LISA DESJARDINS: The much-used
and often reviled
campaign ad faces a real test in
2016. First,
the sheer numbers could break
records: Some
experts estimate we will see an
astonishing
$4.4 billion in political TV
ads. But ads
so far have not brought results
for some.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Serious
times require serious
leadership.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republican Jeb
Bush has spent
more on ads than any other
candidate, but
he is stalled in fifth or sixth
place.
PETER FENN, Democratic
Strategist: I have
to say it's pay more, get less.
TV advertising
is not nearly as effective as it
once was,
especially high-level races.
LISA DESJARDINS: Peter Fenn is
president of
Fenn Communications and has
worked in over
300 campaigns.
PETER FENN: Jeb Bush's idea
initially was
to buy a lot of advertising, to
use the $100
million that he'd raise for the
super PAC
and to flood Iowa and flood New
Hampshire.
LISA DESJARDINS: It has not
worked yet. But
front-runner Donald Trump is
trying ads nonetheless,
launching his first this week.
NARRATOR: Donald Trump calls it
radical Islamic
terrorism.
LISA DESJARDINS: With dark
colors and striking
music, the spot talks of fears,
but it may
also address one of Trump's
worries.
PETER FENN: I think his fear is
that he needs
a strong turnout. If people
don't see him
in paid ads, don't see him going
all out in
these states, it might
discourage some of
his voters from voting.
LISA DESJARDINS: Another ad with
strong tones
from Ted Cruz using a visual
metaphor at the
border.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
I understand that when the
mainstream covers
immigration, it often doesn't
see it as an
economic issue.
PETER FENN: Cruz, I think with
his ad this
time of people dressed in suits
and women
in high heels walking across
what would be
the border, visually, people now
are looking
for more creativity in their
advertising.
LISA DESJARDINS: Contrast those
hard-hitting
ads in the crowded GOP race with
the approach
in the smaller Democratic field,
which is
more biographical.
NARRATOR: Praised as one of
America's best
mayors, who governed as a
pragmatist.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
When I think about why I'm doing
this, I think
about my mother, Dorothy.
LISA DESJARDINS: Both of those
got big play
online. But Fenn says 70 percent
of campaign
ad dollars still go to on-air.
PETER FENN: My sense is, this is
changing,
but we're still going to see, in
this election
cycle, television will be king.
LISA DESJARDINS: But for all the
dollars it
brings, we don't yet know how
much television
will influence the choice for
president.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: We follow the money
now with Matea
Gold. She's a national political
reporter
for The Washington Post.
Matea, you have covered a lot of
these campaigns,
as have I. We're not going to
say how old
we are. But compare this to last
cycle. How
is the money being raised
differently and
spent differently?
MATEA GOLD, The Washington Post:
So, what
we have seen in this cycle is
the real full
flowering of the super PAC
effect, and nearly
every presidential candidate,
with the exception
of Bernie Sanders and most
recently Donald
Trump, are running with the
support of super
PACs this time.
And that's changed everything.
That's changed
the way they have gotten in the
race, how
they have raised money, and it's
changed the
way money is being spent. And
already through
mid-December, we saw more than
40 percent
more ads on TV than in the last
cycle at that
point. And eight out of 10 of
those ads were
by outside groups.
GWEN IFILL: And as Lisa pointed
out in her
piece, it's not biographical.
It's not let
me tell you who I am anymore.
MATEA GOLD: Well, one of the
things that I
think we're seeing in the
Republican contest
is, because it is so incredibly
competitive,
and it's really been focused on
issues about
terrorism and ISIS, that those
issues have
really come to the fore in the
advertising
much sooner than I think you
usually see at
this point in a campaign.
GWEN IFILL: So who benefits so
far, especially
in the crowded Republican field,
from this
approach? For whom is this
approach resonating?
MATEA GOLD: Well, I think there
is a really
big question about whether the
super PAC is
going to be the real panacea
that some people
thought it was going to be in
this election.
We already saw two candidates,
Scott Walker
and Rick Perry, forced out of
the contest,
even though they had millions of
dollars left
in their super PACs. There is a
real question
about whether you can succeed
with the support
of super PACs or whether you
need really more
substantial resources in your
campaign.
GWEN IFILL: Well, so then,
explain for us
just one example.
When Jeb Bush -- you wrote about
this in a
big piece in The Washington Post
this week.
When Jeb Bush got into the
field, people thought
he was going to be able to do
what his brother
did, clear the field by the
sheer amount of
money he raised. He raised the
money, but
he clearly didn't clear the
field. What happened?
MATEA GOLD: Money is very
different in this
election than in past elections.
In the past, it's been seen as a
predictor
of success. When money comes,
there's also
a sense that there is a
grassroots support
behind that. Now that donors
that are incredibly
wealthy can give these massive
donations,
it's not necessarily indicative
of any deeper
support.
So, one of the challenges I
think that Jeb
Bush has had is translating the
support he
has among the millionaire class,
who really
put in amazing amount of
resources in the
super PAC, to support on the
ground. And so
while he had a huge amount of
money, other
candidates also had their own
billionaires
supporting them, and they
weren't scared away
by his coffers.
GWEN IFILL: Another example, Ben
Carson was
raising money hand over fist for
a while.
And it was reflecting his
standing in the
polls. Now his standing in the
polls has dropped.
Is it because he didn't spend
the money correctly?
MATEA GOLD: Well, he still is
raising a substantial
amount. He raised $20 million in
the last
quarter.
One of the things that online
fund-raising
allows you to do is reach out to
a cohort
of non-traditional donors. These
aren't professional
donors that get involved in
party politics.
Ben Carson brought a lot of new
people into
the process. And it looks like a
lot of them
are still giving him money.
GWEN IFILL: But how is he
spending it?
MATEA GOLD: Well, a lot of that
money has
gone back into raising more
money. And we
are going to get some more
details about his
finances when the reports come
out at the
end of this month. But that is
going to be
a real indicator of a campaign's
success,
how much cash they actually have
left on hand
heading into this last final
stretch.
GWEN IFILL: We talked about the
billionaires.
What is it? Bernie Sanders calls
them the
millionaires and billionaires.
Who are they this time? Are they
spending
their money differently? Last
time, I remember
Sheldon Adelson kept Newt
Gingrich in the
race simply by writing a check
for a long
time, and I think also Rick
Santorum. And
last time, we saw Ron Burkle,
another millionaire,
giving money to the Clintons.
This time, he
is supporting John Kasich, at
least for now.
That seems to be a different --
I don't know,
just a different way of
organizing this.
MATEA GOLD: One of the things
that's so interesting
is that the donor class has
expanded. We're
seeing new names that are not
your traditional
political givers.
Some of the biggest backers of
Senator Ted
Cruz are a family in Texas, the
Wilks brothers,
who have made a lot of money
through fracking.
And they have put together $15
million worth
of contributions into a super
PAC supporting
Ted Cruz.
And so a lot of folks who are
not bold-faced
names in the political world are
getting engaged,
in part because there are these
new mechanisms
for them to do so.
GWEN IFILL: Well, and here is
something that
is completely different than
anything we have
seen before, which is, of
course, is the rise
of Donald Trump before he had
even spent a
lot of money. And even though
now he's starting
to put ads on the air, it seems
like he's
changed the formula as well.
MATEA GOLD: The Trump impact has
completely
transformed how money is being
spent and whether
it's even effective this time.
His rivals complain he's
basically getting
free airtime. And so their paid
media is not
going to be as potent, because
he's getting
even more airtime just getting
on cable news.
That is going to be a real
question. He's
started to spend money now, but
will he actually
be able to succeed largely
through earned
media?
GWEN IFILL: Is this something
that the candidates
are scrambling to counter,
specifically to
do with Trump or specifically to
do with his
approach, by maybe, I don't
know, talking
about issues?
MATEA GOLD: The issues are
different in each
part of the race, and obviously
the Republicans
right now are trying to really
outdo each
other with warnings about the
threats facing
America.
That seems to be consuming the
Republican
electorate right now. I mean,
concerns about
ISIS and terrorism have
overtaken, we have
found, concerns about taxes and
health care
in the polls. So, whereas
Obamacare looked
like it was going to be a
driving issue, right
now, that's not something that
gets as much
attention, at least not on the
air.
GWEN IFILL: Who does that
benefit and who
does that hurt so far, at least
in fund-raising?
MATEA GOLD: Well, in
fund-raising, we're going
to see at the end of this month,
but I think
Ted Cruz and Ben Carson have had
the most
success in their campaigns, and
Donald Trump
is doing the best in the polls.
GWEN IFILL: OK. Well, we will
see how it shakes
out when people actually start
to vote very
soon.
MATEA GOLD: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Matea Gold of The
Washington Post,
thank you.
MATEA GOLD: Always a pleasure.
Thanks.